क्रुत्रिम बुध्दिमत्तेचा प्रलय


[800-850 words: Specific to AI boon/bane, not about Internet, Automation, Social Media as such although at some places they overlap to an extent.]
नुकतीच अलेली एक बातमी तुम्ही वाचलिये का? सरहदेच्या पलिकडुन आता शस्त्रास्त्र आणि रोख रक्कम ड्रोन द्वारे पठवली जात आहेत.
terror outfits from Pakistan have started sending weapons and cash via drones. No need to send terrorists as it is not only risky but very challenging dur to terrain and military presence.
Even in civilian life, drones are getting used in normal package delivery.

What is AI:
	If machines/software/computer starts doing same thing what humans consider as intelligent, then that is called as AI. Examples; playing chess, doing transnational, driving a car, detecting faces etc.
	

	
	kaay hote aahe?
	data deluge, AI can handle data well, leverage it, build patterns for predictions.

Applications of AI:
	kothe vaparale jaat aahe: every day applications.
	AI cha vaapar Internet applications, Automation, Social Media itydai barchay goshtii hotana disat aahe.
	
	SMS type करत asatanaa पुढील शब्द tumhala suchavala jato, मानवी veg vegale ucchar आता मशीन्स ना कळत आहेत.जस की Siri kinva अलेक्सा आपण जे karayala sangato te smajun gheun, shakya asel tar kele jate.
	
	भारतात AI cha vapar रोजच्या जीवनातील goshtin pasoon रोजगार, व्यवसाय, विज्ञान, टेक्नॉलॉजी, अभियांत्रिकी या सर्व क्षेत्रांमध्ये वाढत आहे. विशेष करून औद्योगिक क्रांतिche 4the parv (Industria Revolution 4.0) तसेच सामाजिक आर्थिक विकासाच्या drushtine त्याची उपयोगिता  वाढली आहे.

	कृत्रिम बुद्धिमत्तेचे itar उपयोग

	संगणक गेमिंग
	नैसर्गिक भाषा प्रक्रिया
	वdruk shravya प्रक्रिया
	रोबोट
	Internet of Things (IoT)
	नवीन औषधे नवीन रसायने शोध
	खाण उद्योग
	वकाशापर्यंत ... स्टॉक मार्केट
	विमा कंपन्यां


Need for AI:
	AI chi garaj: it is humanly impossible to read or consume huge amount of data coming daily. No one cannot be expert. Eg.  can laywer go through thousands of judgments getting delivered everyy day and then reference them in his/her own case? Can a researchers study thousands of papers getting published and check for duplicate and build on top.
	Can HR person go through thousands of resume/applications coming daily?
	We have NO choice but to use AI.
 
AI Limitations:
	sadhyachi limitations: specific vs general AI, but more data more accuracy, widespread applications. can not do creativity, culture, emotions, care etc. recommendation engines are pretty premitive, you can see the choices of videos recommended at youtube, books at amazon or pdocust at flipkart. Sometme it feels that they are getting it wrong or may be they are promoting something.

Problems with AI:
	AI needs lots of data and correct data. Humans need not. Just by looking at once a child can recognize whether this animal is a dog or a cat, whereas AI program needs to see millions of images.
	
	पूर्वाग्रहों और असमानताओं को बढ़ावा देना: यह नहीं भूलना चाहिये कि AI प्रणाली मनुष्यों द्वारा बनाया गया है, जो पक्षपाती और निर्णयात्मक हो सकते हैं। इस प्रकार AI पूर्वाग्रहों और असमानताओं को बढ़ावा दे सकता है, यदि AI एल्गोरिदम का प्रारंभिक प्रशिक्षण पक्षपाती है।
उदाहरण के लिये AI का प्रयोग कर चेहरे की पहचान और निगरानी तकनीक को रंग या किसी विशिष्ट पहचान से जोड़ कर लोगों के साथ भेदभाव किया जा सकता है।
गोपनीयता की समस्या: AI सिस्टम बड़ी मात्रा में डेटा का विश्लेषण करके सीखते हैं और अगली बार यदि उससे मिलता-जुलता डेटा सामने आए तो उन्हीं विश्लेषण के आधार पर निष्कर्ष देते हैं। साथ ही वे इंटरेक्शन डेटा और उपयोगकर्त्ता के प्रतिक्रियाओं के निरंतर मॉडलिंग के माध्यम से अनुकूलन करते रहते हैं।
इस प्रकार AI के बढ़ते उपयोग के साथ, किसी की गतिविधियों की निगरानी कर उसके डेटा तक अनधिकृत पहुॅंच से निजता का अधिकार खतरे में पड़ सकता है।
गैर-अनुपातिक शक्ति और नियंत्रण: बाज़ार में कार्यरत बड़ी शक्तियाॅं कृत्रिम बुद्धिमत्ता के दोनों स्तरों, वैज्ञानिक/इंजीनियरिंग तथा वाणिज्यिक और उत्पाद विकास, पर भारी निवेश कर रहे हैं।
किसी भी महत्त्वाकांक्षी प्रतियोगी की तुलना में इन बड़ी शक्तियों को कहीं अधिक लाभ होगा जो तकनीक प्रेरित एकाधिकार या अल्पाधिकार (Monopoly or Oligopoly) को बढ़ावा देगा। 
तकनीक प्रेरित बेरोज़गारी: AI कंपनियाॅं ऐसी मशीनों का निर्माण कर रही हैं जो आमतौर पर कम आय वाले श्रमिकों द्वारा किये जाने वाले कार्यों को करती हैं।
उदाहरण के लिये कैशियर को बदलने के लिये सेल्फ सर्विस कियोस्क, फील्ड वर्कर्स को बदलने के लिये फ्रूट-पिकिंग रोबोट आदि।
इसके अलावा, वह दिन दूर नहीं जब AI द्वारा कई डेस्क जॉब, जैसे कि एकाउंटेंट, वित्तीय व्यापारी और प्रबंधक को भी समाप्त कर दिया जाएगा।
	
Industries/roles getting affected:

According to the report from NASSCOMM, Data and Artificial Intelligence (AI) could potentially add $450-500 billion to India’s gross domestic product (GDP) by 2025 and drive India’s economic growth.

AI technology benefits students as well as teachers through its ability to do one thing most schools don’t have the time or staff to achieve: personalize content to the individual.

	shodh | karmachari
	------------------
	driver-less car | drivers
	drones delivery | delivery people
	Automatic assessment | teachers/examiners
	Chatbot | front desk, customer care
	Resume assessment| HR
	Machine Translation| Translators
	Scan detection | Radiologist/doctors

Social Impact:
Many jobs were displaced even before the emergence of AI. There has been a decline in occupations such as travel agent, milkman, elevator operator, and more importantly, jobs involving mundane manual repetative jobs. 

	India has has 40 lakh drivers and there is a shortage of 25 lakh drivers, and that driving skills can provide employment failing which jobs of 1 crore people would be at stake.
	
	questions emerged specific to developing countries like India vs a vis Developed America:
	Ameriket thik asel ho, tethe manasech nahit kamala, pan bharata sarakhya deshanceh kaay, thethe haatala kaam ahi, tar asah shodhanche kaay honar.... shevati dawrin cha utranticha niayamach te tharavel... konachi sarashi honara, ya shodhanchi ki mansanchaya skills chi. sarakar tyat dhodya far pramanat akshep gheun ai che negative feects thambavanaya prayatn karel but ya ai chaya fayadhyanceya pralaya pudhe te kiti ticket mahit nahi...
	
	while machines are becoming smarter, people are getting dumber and more dependent because they rely on these social media systems for basic self-esteem and communication, including mail, search engines and so on.
	
	
	Legal issue: if driver-less car hits someone, who is to be blamed? computer software? or the programmers who wrote them? or places from where the data was gathered?
	
	Data can bring bias, racism, in equality and lacks Explanability. Unless quantified and present in data, it can not consider cultural nuances, traditions of the regions, etc.
	
	"jashi khaN tashi mati"
	
	Although many jobs have been displaced with the adoption of AI systems, research shows that it is also giving rise to new jobs. Experts say that humans will have to remain at the centre of the automated workforce by learning new skills rather than carrying out mundane tasks.

Is AI controllable/regulate-able? : 

renowned theoretical physicist Stephen Hawking along with his colleagues Stuart Russell, Max Tegmark, and Frank Wilczek recommend moving cautiously in the development of artificial intelligence (AI), especially in the area of autonomous weapon systems. Hawking and his colleagues understand, however, that the AI genie has already been released from the bottle and there is no way to get it back in.

	meaning is data access controllable, some regulations HIPPA, GDPR, but to get the service, data will be asked. Knowingly or unknowingly, if you are doing online transactions, its likely that your transactions details are getting collected and used for building AI.
	Can governments or anyone stop or change direction?:If things can be quantified, collected as data, AI can be there, but if not...say creative fields, novel research, care, emotions, its going to be very hard for AI to come close to humans.
	
	Many of us think that government and corporate surveillance and invasion of privacy is a pressing concern. But others may see those outcomes as a promising opportunity to remake society the way they think it should be.
	
	The naïve assumption the public makes is that these free services are being given out of the generosity of the big tech companies
	But the reality is that in exchange for these free services, the companies are gathering big data, which is invaluable in training their algorithms that drive artificial intelligence. The purpose of these algorithms is to influence and motivate the behaviour of consumers on behalf of advertisers, and this is how companies make money.
	
How to adapt?: If you cant fight, join them!! 
yaa pralayat modun padayache ka tycha vegacaha vaaparkkarun ajun jomane pudhe jayache the apalya haatat aahe.

Most of the work of the future doesn’t exist yet, so you can’t specialize for it. Sure, tech skills are valuable, and many of them can be learned on the cheap. Sagalyanchich ya sathi scintist or engineer honyachi garaj nahi, pan tychaya vaparchi tondolakh matra jaroor asavi.

