PETITIONER: GODAVARI SUGAR MILLS LTD. Vs. RESPONDENT: KEPARGAON TALUKA SAKHAR KAMGARSABHA, SAKARWADIDATE 
OF JUDGMENT:16/12/1960
BENCH: WANCHOO, K.N.
BENCH: WANCHOO, K.N. GAJENDRAGADKAR, P.B. GUPTA, K.C. DAS
CITATION: 1961 AIR 1016 1961 SCR (3) 342
ACT: Industrial Dispute-System of contract labour-Abolitions by Industrial Court--Jurisdiction-If violative of employer’s fundamental right to carry on business-Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1947(11 of 1947), ss. 3(18), 42(2), 73A, Item (2) SCh.  11, Item (6) Sch.	III--Constitution of India, Art. 19(1)(g). 
HEADNOTE: A dispute having arisen between the appellant-employer and its workmen regarding the employment of contract labour in the appellant’s mills, the union representing	the workmen which is the respondent in the present case after serving notice on the	 appellant under s.  42(2) of	 the Bombay Industrial Relations Act referred to the Industrial Court under S. 73A of the Act demanding the abolition of the system	of employing contractors' labour and the permanent increment of employees in the respective departments.	 The contention of	the appellant, inter alia, was that	 the Industrial Court had no jurisdiction to decide the dispute which was within the exclusive jurisdiction of a Labour Court under item (6) of Sch.  III of the Act, and that	 any award directing the abolition of contract labour would contravene the	 appellant's fundamental right to carry on business under	 Art.  19(1)(g) of the	 Constitution.	 The Industrial Court decided that the Industrial	Court would have jurisdiction as the matter was covered by item (2) of Sch.  11 of the Act and that there was no contravention of the fundamental rights of the appellants.  On	 appeal	 the Labour	Appellate Tribunal, held, that the Industrial Court had jurisdiction to decide the matter although it was	 not covered	 by item (2) of Sch. 11 of the Act.  About	 the question of contravention of the fundamental right it	held that the question whether the restriction	imposed	 was reasonable depended upon the facts of each case and	 the matter	was outside the powers of a court	 of appeal. Eventually it set aside the entire award on the merits.	  On appeal 'by the appellant by special leave, Held, that the Industrial Court had jurisdiction to	deal with the matter. Whatever might be the ambit of the word "employment" used in item (6) of Sch.  III, if a matter was covered by Sch.	  11it could only be referred to the Industrial Court under s.73A.   A question relating to the abolition	of contract labour	inevitably raised a dispute relating	 to matters contained in items (2), (9) and (10)	of Sch.	 11, namely, permanent increase in the number of343persons	 employed, the employees' wages, hours of work	 and rest intervals and could, therefore, be referred only to an Industrial Court. The power given to the Industrial Court which was a quasi-judicial tribunal to decide whether contract labour should be    abolished	 or not would not make the definition of “industrial “matter" in so far as it referred to the	mode of   employment	 an S.	 unreasonable restriction on	 the fundamental right of the employer to carry on his trade	 and as such there was no contravention of his fundamental right by providing in S.  3(18) that an	"industrial matter “included also the mode of employment of the employees.
JUDGMENT: 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION:  
Civil Appeal No. 352 of 1958.Appeal	by special leave from the judgment and	order dated July 27, 1956, of the Labour Appellate Tribunal of India, Bombay, in Appeal (Bom.) No. 72 of 1956. G....S. Pathak, J. B. Detaching, S. N. Ansley and RameshwarNath, for the appellant.... S.	 Nargoulkar and K. R. Choudhuri, for the respondent No. 1.B. P. Maheshwari, for the Interveners.1960.  December 16.  
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by WANCHOO, J.-
This is an appeal by special leave in an industrial matter.  The appellant owns two sugar mills. There was a dispute between the appellant and	its workmen with respect to the employment of contract labour in the two mills.	Consequently, a notice of change under S. 42 (2) of the Bombay Industrial	 Relations Act, No.  XI of 1947, (hereinafter called the Act) was given to the appellant by the union re. presenting the workmen.  Thereafter the union, which is the respondent in the present appeal, made	 two references to the industrial court, one with respect to each mill, under s. 73A of the Act, and the main demand in	 the references was that "the system of employing contractors ‘labour should be abolished and the strength of the employees of   the respective departments should   be permanently increased sufficiently344and accordingly".  The appellant raised two main contentions before the industrial court, namely, (I) that the industrial court had no jurisdiction to decide the dispute as	 the matter	was covered by item (6) of Sch.   III	of the Act, which is within the exclusive jurisdiction of a labour court;	and (ii) that any award directing abolition of contract labour would contravene the fundamental right of the appellant to carry on business under Art.	19(1)(g) of the Constitution. The industrial	 court decided both he points	against	 the appellant; on the question of jurisdiction it held that	 the matter was covered by item (2) of Sch. 11 of the Act	 and therefore the industrial court would have jurisdiction,	 Andon the second point it held that there was no contravention of the fundamental right conferred on the appellant under Art.  19(1)(g).	 It may be mentioned that the second point arose on the stand taken by the appellant that the workmen of the contractors were not the workmen of the appellant. The industrial court then dealt with the merits of the	case and passed certain orders, with which we are	however	 not concerned in the present appeal. It may	 be mentioned that there were cases relating to several other sugar mills raising the same points, which were decided at the same time by the industrial court.	  Inconsequence, there were several appeals to	 the Labour Appellate Tribunal by the mills and one by one of the unions (though	 not by the respondent-union).	 All these appeals were heard together by the appellate tribunal,	 where	also the same two points relating to jurisdiction	and contra-venation of the fundamental right guaranteed by Art. 19(1)(g) were raised.  The Appellate Tribunal did not agree with	 the industrial court that the references were covered by	item (2) of Sch. 11 to the Act.  It, however, held that the	word “employment” in item (6) of Sch.  III to the Act had to begiven a restricted meaning.  It pointed out that the three Schedules did not exhaust the comprehensive provisions of s.42(2) and the	 subject-matter	 of dispute, namely,	 the abolition of contract labour was a question of far reaching and important change which could not have345been intended to be dealt with in a summary way by a labour court,	which is the lowest in the hierarchy of courts established under the	 Act.  It therefore held that	 the industrial court had jurisdiction to decide the matter.	  On the question of contravention of the, fundamental right, the appellate  tribunal took the view that the question  whether the  restriction  imposed was reasonable depended  upon	 the facts  of each case and therefore was a matter	outside	 its power as a court of appeal It then considered the merits  of the  matter and came to the conclusion that the approach  of the  industrial court to the questions raised before it	 was not  correct and therefore it found it difficult to  support the  award.  Eventually it set aside the award and remanded the   matter for early hearing in the light   of	 the observations made by it.  Further, it decided that in	 the interest of justice the entire award should be	 set aside, even though there was no appeal before it by the unions in most of the cases.  The appellant then came to	 this Courtland was granted special leave; and that is how	 the matter has come up before us. Mr.  Pathak on behalf of the appellant has raised the	same two points before us.  We shall first deal with the question of jurisdiction.  Reliance in this connection is placed on item (6) of Sch.  III of the Act, which is in these terms: -"Employment including-(I) reinstatement and recruitment;(ii) unemployment of persons previously employed in	 the industry concerned. “It is not in dispute that matters contained in Sch.  III are within the jurisdiction of a labour court and an industrial court has no	jurisdiction to decide any matter in a reference under s.  73A of the Act which is	 within	 the jurisdiction of a labour court.  Mr. Pathak contends	that item (6) of Sch.  III speaks of "employment" and includes in it two matters which might otherwise not have been thought to be	included in it.   Therefore,	per	him, employment as used in item (6) is wider than the two matters included in it44346and the question whether contract labour should be employed or not would be a matter of employment within the meaning of that word in	item (6) of Sch. 111.  We do not think it necessary for purposes of this appeal to consider what would be the ambit of employment as used in item (6) of Sch.	111.The scheme of the Act shows that under ss. 71 and 72	 the jurisdiction of a labour court and an industrial court is concurrent with respect to any matters which the State Government may deem fit to refer to them; but under s.	 73Areference by a registered union which is a representative of employees and which is also an approved union, can only be made to an industrial court, subject to the proviso that no such dispute can be referred to an industrial	court where under the provisions	of the Act it	is required to be referred to the labour court for its decision.	 Sec. 78 of the Act provides for jurisdiction of	 labour	 courts	 and matters specified in Sch.  11 are not within their ordinary jurisdiction.  Therefore, when a registered union wishes to refer any matter which is contained in Sch.  11 of the	 Act such reference	 can be made by it only	 to the industrial court.	 It follows in consequence that whatever may be	 the ambit of the word "employment" used in item (6) of	Sch.III, if any matter is covered by Sch. 11 it can only be referred to the industrial court under s.  73A.   Now	 the question whether contract labour should be abolished (on the assumption that contract labour is not in the employ of	 the mills)	immediately raises questions relating to permanent increase in the number of persons employed,	their wages including the period and mode of payment, hours of work	 and rest intervals, which are items (2), (9) and (10) of	Sch.11.  Therefore, a question relating to abolition of contract labour	is so inextricably mixed up with the	question of permanent increase in the number of persons employed, their wages,	hours of work and rest intervals that	any dispute relating to contract labour would inevitably raise questions covered	 by Sch.  11.	Therefore, a dispute	relating to contract labour if it is to be referred under s. 73A by registered union can only be referred to an industrial court it immediately347raises matters contained in items (2), (9) and (10) of	Sch.11.   Mr.  Pathak urges however that matters	relating to permanent increase in the number of persons employed due tithe abolition of contract labour, their wages, hours of work and rest intervals were not really disputed at all by	 the appellant.  It appears that in the written-statements of the appellant, these points were not raised; but the decision of the appellate	tribunal shows that one of the	 contentions raised	before	it by the sugar-mills was that	the workmen concerned were not employees of the sugar mills.  Therefore, as soon as this contention is raised a dispute as to permanent increase in the number of persons employed, their wages,	hours of work and rest intervals would	 immediately arise.	 It must therefore be held that a question relating to the	 abolition of contract labour inevitably raises dispute with respect to these three items contained in	Sch.11.   In the circumstances, we are of opinion that	 the industrial court had jurisdiction to deal with the matter. We may point out that in their petitions	 the unions had raised at least the question as to the permanent increase in the number of persons employed and that would immediately bring in item (2) of Sch.	11. It is true	that the question of permanent increase in the number of  persons employed,  their  wages, hours of work	and  rest  intervals would only arise if contract labour is to be abolished;	 but in  our opinion these are matters so inextricably  mixed  up with  the question relating to abolition of contract  labour that they must be held to be in dispute as soon as the	dis-put  is  raised  about the abolition  of  contract  labour,(assuming always that the employer does not accept  contract labour	as part of its labour force).  The contention about jurisdiction must therefore be rejected. This brings us to the second contention raised by	 Mr. Pathak.	  He bases his argument in this behalf on s.  3(18), which defines an " industrial matter " as meaning any matter relating   to employment, work, wages, hours of   work, privileges, rights or duties of employers or employees, orthel mode, terms and conditions of	employment.   Mr.  Pathak urges that	 the definition   of	 “industrial	matter “contravenes	 the fundamental right guaranteed under Art. 19(1)(g), when it provides that the mode of employment is also included within it.   Reference	 is also made to s. 3(17) which	 defines an “industrial dispute" as any dispute or difference which relates to any industrial matter.  Mr. Pathak therefore urges	that reading the two	 definitions together	 the industrial court is given the power to decide disputes as tithe mode of employment and that contravenes the	 fundamental right guaranteed under Art. 19(1)(g), for it	 enables an industrial court to adjudicate on the mode of employment and thus interfere with the right of the employer to carry on his trade as he likes subject to reasonable restrictions. Now if the mode of employment used in s.  3(18) includes such questions as abolition of contract labour, the question would still be whether a provision which enables an industrial court to adjudicate on the question whether	con-tract labour should or should not be abolished is an unreasonable restriction on the employer's right to carry on his trade.  We cannot see how the fact that power is given to the industrial court, which is a quasi-judicial tribunal to decide whether contract labour should be abolished or not would make the definition of "industrial matter" in so	 fares it	refers to the mode of employment, an	unreasonable restriction on the fundamental, right of the	employer to carry on trade.  The matter being entrusted to a quasi-judicial tribunal would be decided after giving both parties full   opportunity of	presenting their case	 and   after considering whether in the circumstances of a case the restriction	on the	 mode of employment is reasonable restriction or not.	The tribunal would always go into the reasonableness of the matter and if it concludes that the mode of employment desired by labour is not reasonable	 it will not allow it; it is only when it concludes that the mode of employment desired by labour in a case is a reasonable restriction349that it will insist on that mode of employment being used.  Take, for example, the case of contract labour itself.	  The tribunal must go into the facts of each case.  If it concludes that on the facts the employment	 of contract labour is reasonable and	thus doing away with it would be an unreasonable restriction on the right of the employer to carry on trade, it will permit contract labour to be carried on.  On the other hand, if it concludes that employment of contract labourism unreasonable in the circumstances of the case before it will hold that it should be abolished, the reason being that its abolition would be a reasonable restriction in	 the circumstances.	 Therefore, the decision whether the mode of employment in a case is a reasonable	 restriction or unreasonable one is in the hands of a quasi-judicial tribunal.   In the circumstances, it cannot be said that by providing ins. 3(18) that an "industrial matter” includes also the mode of employment, there is any contravention of the fundamental right of the employer to carry on trade.  If the argument on behalf of the appellant were to be accepted it would mean that judicial and quasi-judicial decisions could be unreasonable restrictions on fundamental rights and this the Constitution does not envisage at all.   We	 are therefore of opinion that this contention also fails. Finally, Mr.  Pathak draws our attention to ss.  3(13)	 and3(14) of the Act and submits that the appellant never	said that contract labour employed in its mills was not in its employment.   Sec.  3(13) defines the word “employee"	 and includes in it any person employed by a contractor to do any work for him in the execution of a contract with an employer within	the meaning of sub-cl. (e) of cl. (14).	 Sec.  3(14) defines	 the word "employer" in an inclusive manner and	 in-clues "where the owner of any undertaking in the course for for conducting the undertaking contracts with any person for the execution by or under the contractor of the	 whole or any part of any work which is ordinarily part of the undertaking, the owner of the undertaking".	  Itis urged that in view350of these definitions, the employees of the contractors	 are the employees of the mills and the mills are the employers of these employees of the contractors.   Therefore,	 Mr. Pathak	urges  that  there is no  necessity    of abolishing contract labour and that the industrial court may, if it  so chooses,  give	the same wages and hours of  work  and rest intervals  and other terms and conditions of  employment  tithe  employees	of  the	 contractors  as  are  provided	 for comparable  direct  employees of the appellant and  in	such circumstances  it  would  not be necessary  to	abolish	 the contract system so long as the employees of contractors	 are to  be in the same position as the direct employees  of	 the appellant as to their terms and conditions of service.	This was not however the-way the case was contested before the industrial court or the appellate tribunal.	 All that we need therefore say is that when the matter goes back before	the  industrial court as directed by  the  appellate tribunal,  the industrial court may take this submission  of the  appellant into account and may consider whether  it  is necessary  to  abolish	the contract  system,  provided	 the appellant  is  able  to assure	the  industrial	 court	that employees  of  the  contractors who are	 deemed	 to  be	 its employees within the meaning of s. 3(13) and s. 3(14)  would have  the full benefit of the same terms and  conditions  of service as its comparable direct employees. The appeal fails and is hereby dismissed with costs. Appeal dismissed.
