wrong billing and oustanding
Dear Sir/Madam,
I am highly depressed and shocked after seeing a letter from you Bank (ref nos.- 0004728041203); which written about the outstanding of Rs16750.37 INR (deliberated outstanding) in credit card account (4477XXXXXXXX7003). This credit card account has been taken in 2003 by me and also closed due to very poor response from your Credit card branch. Please refer attached scan document where you may find the evidence of my communication to your branch long time back (2004-5). I return back the cut pieces of Credit card to you branch along with my application to close account immediately after the teleconference with customer care at that time.

As, I have saving account with your branch in Indore (0041010XXXXX); your Lien/Credit card department forcedly block my balance deposits with this account number without any prior notice/intimation. Why this today?
Moreover, I did not received any notice or communication from the Credit card division/ICICI Bank about the outstanding since 2004 and I was in perception that there is no any concern or problem in connection with mine closed Credit card account.

Then from where this outstanding come suddenly after nine years? Your officers are harassing me now during teleconference? I never hide any information about me since long time with the ICICI Bank records. In addition to that I have Loan, Insurance and saving account with the ICICI Bank and did not face any problem. Then from where this new surprise come in front of me.

I request to senior official of the ICICI bank that Please look into the matter so that I have faith on regulatory mechanism of your organization to pursue further as well as current commercial relations.
On 1st of May 2012 received the letter about the lien marked on my bank account towards unpaid outstanding dues; and immediately call the customer care executive so that the scheduled ICICI home loan EMI on 7th May 2012 will not suffer and I have another surprise of penalty. Unfortunately they did not help me and that’s why I am escalating this matter to you.

Best Regards,
Anoop Kumar SINGH
…………………………………..
Phone 9765556083